# Setup Komodo Notary Node

## NN Repo Quick Reference

::: tip Disclaimer
This guide serves to offer notary operators a reference for building a Komodo Notary Node server. It is possible that some instructions could be deprecated by the time you read it (e.g. coin commit hashes) - please refer to [https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/dPoW/blob/master/doc](https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/dPoW/blob/master/doc) for more recent updates.
:::

Traditionally, Komodo Notary Nodes have been setup using a "Main" and "Third party" server. The "Main" server is used to notarize KMD and Antara smart chains, and the "Third party" server is used to notarize coins from external projects.
Beginning in season 7, the Komodo Notary Node network will allow running the old "Third party" node on the same server as the "Main" node. Though operators may use alternative methods of virtualisation such as proxmox, this guide will focus on using docker containers to run the "Third party" daemons.

The steps for setting up your nodes are as follows:
- Secure your Server
- Install KMD and LTC Deamons, then launch them, import the private key linked to your "Main" elected pubkey, and let them sync. and let them sync (this may take a couple of days).
- Launch the other "Main" server chains, import the private key linked to your "Main" elected pubkey, and let them sync.
- Setup the 3rd Party docker containers, import the private key linked to your "3P" elected pubkey, and let them sync.
- Install and configure Iguana

Some additional tips will be included at the end of the guide to help with node management and maintainence.

If you face problems, please join the `#notarynode` channel on the [Komodo Discord Server](https://komodoplatform.com/discord) for help.

::: tip Note

We recommend the Notary Node Operators to check the Table at [https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/dPoW/tree/season-seven#dpow-asset-status](https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/dPoW/tree/season-seven#dpow-asset-status) for latest information on the repositories and branches/commits to use for installing chains. If there is contradicting information in this document, treat the information within the dPoW reopsitory as the point of truth. Using the **exact** repository and branch/tag listed is very important for the security of the network.

:::

## Minimum System Requirements

Notary nodes **must** be run on a dedicated server in a Tier 3 datacenter. Running on a local desktop PC or VPS is not allowed. The minimum system requirements are as follows:

- **OS:** Debian/Ubuntu LTS x64 - minimal installation with Openssh server (recommended).
- **CPU:** A High-Performance CPU (e.g. Xeon, i7/i9, Ryzen, EPYC, etc.) with 8+ Cores
- **RAM:** 64GB+ RAM
- **HDD:** 1TB+ (SSD is recommended)
- **Bandwidth**: 100 Mbps or higher
- **Location**: Within the region where you were elected.

This guide assumes you are using Ubuntu 20.04 LTS. If using Debian 11, scroll to the bottom of this guide for notes on required dependencies and build scripts.

---
## Creating notary pubkeys

Once you have been elected as a notary node operator, you will need to generate your notary pubkeys and register them with the Komodo Team via your proposal on [https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/NotaryNodes](https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/NotaryNodes) soon after the election, so they can be included in the Komodo codebase for the next hardfork.

Notary node operators have to provide 2 seperate pubkeys, one for your Main Server and one for your 3rd Party Server. This means you will have to generate 2 seed phrases (i.e passphrases) individually which will each be linked to a pubkey, and a set of addresses and private keys (WIF).

**DO NOT IMPORT YOUR MAIN PUBKEY INTO ANY 3RD PARTY DAEMON. For security, you should never enter your seed phrase or private key in any other node than your specific notary node server. If you ever expose a private key for any particular coin, it can be converted to all other coins easily.**

### Generating a pubkey

Your pubkey will start with `02` or `03`. Follow [this guide](./generate-privkeys-third-party-coins-from-passphrase.md) to generate all the required info in your own server. You will need the "Compressed Public Key", "Compressed WIF" and "Compressed Address" from the output generated by the script. Based on the default seed used in the `genkomodo.php` file, we get the following information:

```bash
Pubkey: 02a854251adfee222bede8396fed0756985d4ea905f72611740867c7a4ad6488c1

LTC Address: LfK5cYTTSDoSVSYtxkTVv8dGnqXYZRsn86
LTC WIF: 6vCN7rsS1bPFgs98G2PQgcHP2EArh39Un1QDh16YrPrJxCZTthq

KMD Address: RVNKRr2uxPMxJeDwFnTKjdtiLtcs7UzCZn
KMD WIF: UtrRXqvRFUAtCrCTRAHPH6yroQKUrrTJRmxt2h5U4QTUN1jCxTAh

EMC2 Address: EdF2quz8nWrJDwTbbTTieFYUMGfPsVB5dv
EMC2 WIF: T7trfubd9dBEWe3EnFYfj1r1pBueqqCaUUVKKEvLAfQvz3JFsNhs

AYA Address: AVjkMgFfmMZbpFvmTxCcxadnD6g1EdQue3
AYA WIF: T6oxgc9ZYJA1Uvsm31Gb8Mg31hHgLWue7RuqQMjEHUWZEi5TdskL
```

CHIPS, all Komodo Smart Chains and Komodo source forks like MCL, TOKEL and VRSC use the same address and WIF format as Komodo (KMD).

### **Do not keep your seed phrase or private keys saved in your local computer! Never import it into any other apps!**

If your notary seed or private keys are compromised, it not only places your server and notary funds at risk, but may also compromise the security of the entire dPoW network. **If you ever suspect that your seed or private keys have been compromised, you should immediately contact the Komodo Team so steps can be taken to mitigate any potential threats.**

It is recommended that you write down the randomly generated seed (24 words) in a piece of paper (or use a rugged physical backup like CryptoSteel), then type directly into your server, or generate the seed phrase on the server itself with a tool like [https://github.com/smk762/DragonhoundTools/blob/master/wallet/gen_seed.py](https://github.com/smk762/DragonhoundTools/blob/master/wallet/gen_seed.py).


---
## Security

**Before doing anything further, ensure that your server is secure.**

::: tip Note
In the examples below, I will use the username `dragonhound`. Please replace this with your own username.
Make sure to use a password manager like [KeePassXC](https://keepassxc.org/) to generate and store your sudo passwords an SSH keys, and backup your password database to a secure location so you dont lose access to your server if your desktop/laptop fails.
:::

- **Update the system**: `sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get upgrade -y`
- **[Create a new user & give it `sudo` permissions](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/initial-server-setup-with-ubuntu-20-04)**:
    ```bash
    adduser dragonhound # to add a new user
    usermod -aG sudo dragonhound # to give the user sudo permissions
    su - dragonhound # to switch to the new user
    ```
- **Install [Fail2ban](https://linuxize.com/post/install-configure-fail2ban-on-ubuntu-20-04/)** with  `sudo apt install fail2ban`. It will start automatically after installation.
- **Install [UFW](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-a-firewall-with-ufw-on-ubuntu-20-04)** (make sure to allow SSH access **before** enabling the firewall).
    ```bash
    sudo apt install ufw
    sudo ufw allow OpenSSH
    sudo ufw enable
    ```
- **[Create an SSH key](https://www.unixtutorial.org/how-to-generate-ed25519-ssh-key/)** on your PC, then add the public SSH key to the server. This will allow you to login without a password. Repeat this step for each device you will use to access the server. For example:
    - Create an ED25519 SSH key (e.g. on your laptop) with `ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "dragonhound@laptop"`
    - View the public key with `cat ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub`.
    - It will look like `ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZD42STE5AAAAIK0wmN/Cr3JXqmLW7u+g9pTh+wyqDHpSQEIQczXkVx9q dragonhound@laptop`
- **Add the SSH key to your server**:
    - On the server, create a `.ssh` folder in your home directory with `mkdir ~/.ssh`
    - Create a file to contain authorized keys with `nano ~/.ssh/authorized_keys`
    - Paste the public key into the file, then save and exit.
    - To confirm that the key works, open a new terminal on your desktop/laptop and run `ssh dragonhound@<SERVER_IP>`. If everything is working, you should be logged in without being asked for a password.
- **[Disable password authentication](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-ssh-keys-on-ubuntu-20-04#disabling-password-authentication-on-your-server)**
    - **Make sure you have added your SSH key to the server and confirmed it is working before doing this!**
    - Open the SSH daemon config file with `sudo nano /etc/ssh/sshd_config`
    - Find the line that says `#PasswordAuthentication yes` and change it to `PasswordAuthentication no` then save and exit the file.
    - Restart the SSH daemon with `sudo systemctl restart sshd`
- **[Disable `root` login](https://www.howtogeek.com/howto/linux/security-tip-disable-root-ssh-login-on-linux/)**
    - Open the SSH daemon config file with `sudo nano /etc/ssh/sshd_config`
    - Set `PermitRootLogin no` then save and exit the file
    - Restart the SSH daemon with `sudo systemctl restart sshd`
- **[Add 32GB of swap space](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorial_collections/how-to-add-swap-space)**
    - View existing swap space with `sudo swapon --show`, existing physical an virtual memory with `free -h`, and disk space with `df -h`.
    - Create a 32GB swap file with `sudo fallocate -l 32G /swapfile`
    - Restrict swap file permissions to root only with `sudo chmod 600 /swapfile`
    - Mark the file as swap space with `sudo mkswap /swapfile`
    - Activate the swap file with `sudo swapon /swapfile`
    - Verify that the swap space is active with `sudo swapon --show` and `free -h`
    - To make the swap file permanent, we'll edit the `fstab` file.
        - First, backup the `fstab` file with `sudo cp /etc/fstab /etc/fstab.bak`
        - Update it with `echo '/swapfile none swap sw 0 0' | sudo tee -a /etc/fstab`
    - Now your swap space should be retained after rebooting.
- **[Change the SSH port](https://linuxhandbook.com/change-ssh-port/)** (optional, but recommended)
    - Open the ssh daemon config file with `sudo nano /etc/ssh/sshd_config`
    - Change the `Port` value to something other than `22` (e.g. `Port 2222`)
    - Save and exit the file, then restart the SSH service with `sudo systemctl restart sshd`
    - Test the new port with `ssh dragonhound@<SERVER_IP> -p 2222`

---
## Additional Configuration Tweaks
The steps below are optional, but recommended to give your node a better chance of performing well based on the experiences of prior season Natary Node Operators.

### Set `ulimit` parameters on Ubuntu permanently

By default, the number of open files per user in Ubuntu is 1024. In our case this number is too small so we will increase it.

This is done with the `ulimit` command:

```bash
ulimit -a   # see all the kernel parameters
ulimit -n   # see the number of open files
ulimit -n 1000000  #  set the number open files to 1000000
```
This will only set the `ulimit` parameters for the current command terminal and user, meaning that after a reboot you’ll need to set the parameter again. Do the following to set it permanently:

- Edit the `/etc/security/limits.conf` file
    ```bash
    sudo nano /etc/security/limits.conf
    ```
- Add these lines:
    ```bash
    * soft nofile 1000000
    * hard nofile 1000000
    ```
- Save and close file

### Set `pam_limits` to `required`
Linux uses PAM (pluggable authentication modules) in the authentication process as a layer that mediates between user and application. The `pam_limits` PAM module sets limits on the system resources that can be obtained in a user-session.

- Edit the `/etc/pam.d/common-session` file
    ```bash
    sudo nano /etc/pam.d/common-session
    ```
- Add this line:
    ```bash
    session required pam_limits.so
    ```
- Save and close the file.

We're done! Now let's stop all our wallet daemons safely with RPC commands and reboot the server using `sudo reboot` or `sudo shutdown -r` command. After the reboot, log back in and check the `ulimit` parameters again.
```bash
ulimit -n
```

---
## Install Iguana & Coin Daemons

The daemons will take a couple of days to sync, so it's best to get them started as soon as possible. If you encounter any errors, please join the `#notarynode` channel on the [Komodo Discord Server](https://komodoplatform.com/discord) for help.

::: tip Note

`-j$(nproc)` uses all the available processor threads while compiling. If you don't want to use all threads, you may specify the number directly like so: `-j8` will use only 8 threads. Alternatively, you may like to use `-j$(expr $(nproc) - 1)`, which will use all the available processors except one.

:::

- **Install dependencies:** 
    ```bash
    sudo apt-get install build-essential pkg-config libc6-dev m4 g++-multilib autoconf libtool ncurses-dev unzip git python python3 python3-zmq zlib1g-dev wget libcurl4-gnutls-dev bsdmainutils automake curl libsodium-dev jq libfmt-dev autotools-dev cmake clang htop libevent-dev libboost-system-dev libboost-filesystem-dev libboost-chrono-dev libboost-program-options-dev libboost-test-dev libboost-thread-dev libssl-dev -y
    ```

---
## Install Iguana

Iguana is the software used to perform notarizations, and needs to be installed from the [dPoW](https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/dPoW) repository.

- **Install nanomsg** (required for Iguana):
    ```bash
    cd ~
    git clone https://github.com/nanomsg/nanomsg
    cd nanomsg
    cmake . -DNN_TESTS=OFF -DNN_ENABLE_DOC=OFF
    make -j2
    sudo make install
    sudo ldconfig
    ```

- **Clone the dPoW repository and build Iguana**:
    ```bash
    # Clone repository
    git clone https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/dPoW -b season-seven
    cd dPoW/iguana

    # Build Iguana
    make
    ```
- **Create pubkey files**:
    Iguana will reference these files when launching to validate your node as an elected notary.
    ```bash
    echo "<YOUR_MAIN_PUBKEY>" > ~/dPoW/iguana/pubkey.txt
    echo "<YOUR_3P_PUBKEY>" > ~/dPoW/iguana/pubkey_3p.txt
    ```
    Some scripts will also look for these files in the `komodo/src` folder, so we'll create a couple more symlinks:
    ```bash
    ln -s ~/dPoW/iguana/pubkey.txt ~/komodo/src/pubkey.txt
    ln -s ~/dPoW/iguana/pubkey_3p.txt ~/komodo/src/pubkey_3p.txt
    ```
- **Create `wp` files**:
    - These files will be used to unlock your wallets when Iguana launches, and are named according to the iguana port they are targeting. The contents will include your seed phrase (or a private key) from the Main or 3P coins you want to unlock for notarisation.
    - The Main Iguana uses port 7776. Create a file called `~/dPoW/iguana/wp_7776` and add the contents as below:
        ```bash
        curl --url "http://127.0.0.1:7776" --data '{
            "method": "walletpassphrase",
            "params": ["YOUR_MAIN_SEEDPHRASE_OR_PRIVATE_KEY", 9999999]
        }'
        ```
    - The Third Party Iguana uses port 7779. Create a file called `~/dPoW/iguana/wp_7779` and add the contents as below:
        ```bash
        curl --url "http://127.0.0.1:7779" --data '{
            "method": "walletpassphrase",
            "params": ["YOUR_3P_SEEDPHRASE_OR_PRIVATE_KEY", 9999999]
        }'
        ```
    - Make the files executable:
        ```bash
        chmod +x ~/dPoW/iguana/wp_7776
        chmod +x ~/dPoW/iguana/wp_7779
        ```
---
- **Install KMD:** [https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/komodo/](https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/komodo/tree/d456be35acd1f8584e1e4f971aea27bd0644d5c5) Branch: `master`
    - Clone repo: `git clone https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/komodo -b master`
    - Enter repo folder `cd komodo`
    - Fetch Zcash params: `./zcutil/fetch-params.sh`
    - Build Komodo: `./zcutil/build.sh -j$(nproc)`
    - Create the data folder and a `komodo.conf` config file
        ```bash
        cd ~
        mkdir .komodo
        nano ~/.komodo/komodo.conf
        ```
        Add the following lines to the `komodo.conf` file and save it (replace rpcuser and rpcpassword)

        ```bash
        rpcuser=usernameChangeItToSomethingSecure
        rpcpassword=passwordChangeItToSomethingSecure
        txindex=1
        addressindex=1
        spentindex=1
        server=1
        daemon=1
        rpcworkqueue=256
        rpcbind=127.0.0.1
        rpcallowip=127.0.0.1
        addnode=15.235.204.174 # Dragonhound_AR
        addnode=209.222.101.247 # Dragonhound_NA
        addnode=103.195.100.32 # Dragonhound_DEV
        ```
        Restrict access to the `komodo.conf` file

        ```bash
        chmod 600 ~/.komodo/komodo.conf
        ```

---
- **Install LTC:** [https://github.com/litecoin-project/litecoin](https://github.com/litecoin-project/litecoin) Branch: `0.16`
    - Clone repo: ` git clone https://github.com/litecoin-project/litecoin -b 0.16`
    - Enter repo folder `cd litecoin`
    - Create `build.sh` script with the following contents and give it executable permissions (`chmod +x build.sh`)
        ```bash
        #!/bin/bash
        # LTC & 3P Coins build script for Ubuntu & Debian (c) Decker
        make -C ${PWD}/depends v=1 NO_PROTON=1 NO_QT=1 HOST=$(depends/config.guess) -j$(nproc --all)

        ./autogen.sh

        CXXFLAGS="-g0 -O2" \
        CONFIG_SITE="$PWD/depends/$(depends/config.guess)/share/config.site" ./configure --disable-tests --disable-bench --without-miniupnpc --enable-experimental-asm --with-gui=no --disable-bip70

        make V=1 -j$(nproc --all)
        ```
    - Execute `./build.sh` to compile the Litecoin binaries.
    - Create the data folder and a `komodo.conf` config file
        ```bash
        cd ~
        mkdir .litecoin
        nano ~/.litecoin/litecoin.conf
        ```
    - Insert the following contents inside the `litecoin.conf` file and save it. (change the `rpcuser` and `rpcpassword` values)
        ```bash
        txindex=1
        rpcport=9332
        rpcuser=litecoinrpcChangeThisToSomethingSecure
        rpcpassword=passwordChangeThisToSomethingSecure
        addnode=15.235.204.174 # Dragonhound_AR
        addnode=209.222.101.247 # Dragonhound_NA
        addnode=103.195.100.32 # Dragonhound_DEV
        ```

    - Restrict access to the `litecoin.conf` file
        ```bash
        chmod 600 ~/.litecoin/litecoin.conf
        ```

---
## Install Third Party coins daemons in Docker
Follow the instructions in [https://github.com/smk762/notary_docker_3p#notary_docker_3p](https://github.com/smk762/notary_docker_3p#notary_docker_3p) to setup the third party coins in docker.

If you need help, please reach out to the Komodo Discord #notary-node channel.

---
## Create Symbolic Links for deamons and cli's
- **For the Main coins**:
    ```bash
    sudo ln -s ~/komodo/src/komodod /usr/local/bin/komodod
    sudo ln -s ~/komodo/src/komodo-cli /usr/local/bin/komodo-cli
    sudo ln -s ~/litecoin/src/litecoind /usr/local/bin/litecoind
    sudo ln -s ~/litecoin/src/litecoin-cli /usr/local/bin/litecoin-cli
    ```
- **For the Third Party coins**, `komodo-cli` will be using a different configuration and data folder, so we'll create a wrapper script to launch the daemon and cli with the correct parameters:

Open wrapper script file for the deamon cli with `nano ~/komodo/src/komodo_3p-cli` and put the following inside:
```bash
#!/bin/bash
komodo-cli -conf=/home/${USER}/.komodo_3p/komodo.conf $@
```
Make the wrapper scripts executable:
```bash
chmod +x /home/$USER/komodo/src/komodo_3p-cli
```
Now we can create a symbolic links for the 3P instance of Komodo:
```bash
sudo ln -s /home/$USER/komodo/src/komodo_3p-cli /usr/local/bin/komodo_3p-cli
```
After building the 3P docker images, the cli binaries for the other 3P coins will be located in the `~/cli-binaries/` folder, so we can create symbolic links for them as well:
```bash
# AYA
sudo ln -s /home/$USER/cli-binaries/aryacoin-cli /usr/local/bin/aryacoin-cli

# CHIPS
sudo ln -s /home/$USER/cli-binaries/chips-cli /usr/local/bin/chips-cli

# EMC2
sudo ln -s /home/$USER/cli-binaries/einsteinium-cli /usr/local/bin/einsteinium-cli

# MCL
sudo ln -s /home/$USER/cli-binaries/marmara-cli /usr/local/bin/marmara-cli

# MIL
sudo ln -s /home/$USER/cli-binaries/einsteinium-cli /usr/local/bin/mil-cli

# TOKEL
sudo ln -s /home/$USER/cli-binaries/tokel-cli /usr/local/bin/tokel-cli

# VRSC
sudo ln -s /home/$USER/cli-binaries/verus /usr/local/bin/verus-cli
```
---
## Launch the daemons

For the first time sync, we will run all the coin daemons normally. Later, we will create a `start` script to start the chains with `-pubkey=$pubkey` parameter which is required for notaring with Iguana.

- Launch the Komodo daemon:
    ```bash
    komodod &
    ```
- Launch the Litecoin daemon:
    ```bash
    litecoind &
    ```
- Launch the remaining "Main" server daemons, and let them sync. You can find the launch parameters for each smart chain at [https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/coins/blob/master/launch/smartchains.json](https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/coins/blob/master/launch/smartchains.json). For example:
    ```bash
    komodod -ac_name=DOC -ac_supply=90000000000 -ac_reward=100000000 -ac_cc=3 -ac_staked=10 -addnode=65.21.77.109 -addnode=65.21.51.47 &
- Launch the 3P dockerised daemons:
    ```bash
    cd ~/notary_docker_3p
    
    # To launch all deamons at once
    docker-compose up -d

    # To launch a single coins deamon (use lowercase ticker)
    docker-compose up <TICKER> -d

    ```
- **Import your private keys**
    ```bash
    # For Komodo
    komodo-cli importprivkey <KMD_PRIVATE_KEY>

    # For Litecoin
    litecoin-cli importprivkey <KMD_PRIVATE_KEY>

    # For individual main smart chains (replace <TICKER> with the smart chain ticker)
    komodo-cli -ac_name=<TICKER> importprivkey <KMD_PRIVATE_KEY>

    # For all main smart chains
    cd ~/dPoW/iguana
    ./assetchains.old

    # For 3P deamons
    cd ~/notary_docker_3p
    ./importkeys.sh
    ```
- **Check the sync status**
    ```bash
    # Check the status of the KMD sync process
    tail -f ~/.komodo/debug.log

    # Check the status of the LTC sync process
    tail -f ~/.litecoin/debug.log

    # Check the status of the Main smart chain sync process
    tail -f ~/.komodo/<TICKER>/debug.log

    # Check the status of the 3P smart chain sync process  (use lowercase ticker)
    cd ~/notary_docker_3p
    docker compose logs -f <TICKER> --tail 20
    ```

The debug.log will have lines like:

`2023-06-15 09:08:05 UpdateTip: new best=0c01379c24db5055444983d447ce5af58a9ed50072b4a08a3fec0b151cf51213  height=3463643  log2_work=53.293613  tx=20987955  date=2023-06-15 09:08:06 progress=1.000000  cache=43.6MiB(143561tx)`

When you see `progress=1.000000`, the chain is in sync! This can take a while, so be patient.

Once sync'd, we can confirm our private keys were correctly imported by using the `validateaddress` command with the KMD address linked to our private key. For example:
```bash
komodo-cli validateaddress RDragoNHdwovvsDLSLMiAEzEArAD3kq6FN
```
This will return a JSON object with the address details. If the address is valid, you will see `"ismine": true`.
```json
{
  "isvalid": true,
  "address": "RDragoNHdwovvsDLSLMiAEzEArAD3kq6FN",
  "scriptPubKey": "76a91432311a35188a9439c6c866e842564d6fefd3a02888ac",
  "segid": 45,
  "ismine": true,
  "iswatchonly": false,
  "isscript": false,
  "pubkey": "038e010c33c56b61389409eea5597fe17967398731e23185c84c472a16fc5d34ab",
  "iscompressed": true,
  "account": ""
}
```


---
## AtomicDEX Seed node setup (optional, but recommended)

Simple scripts to setup and configure MM2 as a seednode on your 3P server are available at [https://github.com/smk762/nn_mm2_seed](https://github.com/smk762/nn_mm2_seed). The mm2 seed node will also need ports `38890` and `38900` opened on the 3p server.

**This may be included in the 3P dockerised setup in the future.**

---
## Stop All Coin Daemons Safely

Once you've completed syncing, imported and validated your keys in all your daemons, we'll stop all the daemons for some final configuration.

::: warning
Unless you are a fan of corrupt databases, **never** use `kill -9` to stop any Coin daemon. Always shutdown wallet daemon and iguana gracefully with `pkill -15 iguana` or use the commands below.
:::

```bash
# To stop KMD
komodo-cli stop

# To stop LTC
litecoin-cli stop

# For all other Main Smart Chains
cd ~/komodo/src
./fiat-cli stop

# For individual 3P dockerised daemons
cd ~/nn_docker_3p
docker compose stop <TICKER> # Use lowercase ticker

# For all 3P dockerised daemons
cd ~/nn_docker_3p
docker compose stop
```

---
## Restrict access to config files
Once all the chains' daemons have stopped, let's restrict access to all the `.conf` files inside `~/.komodo` and `~/.komodo_3p`  folders

```bash
find ~/.komodo -type f -iname "*.conf" -exec chmod 600 {} \;
find ~/.komodo_3p -type f -iname "*.conf" -exec chmod 600 {} \;
```

---
## Address whitelisting (optional, but recommended)

If you are using a whitelist for incoming transactions (recommended to avoid dust attacks!) funding top ups will come from the dragonhound_DEV nodes using the addresses `RHi882Amab35uXjqBZjVxgEgmkkMu454KK` (Main), and `RLdmqsXEor84FC8wqDAZbkmJLpgf2nUSkq` (3P), so add these addresses to your respective whitelists. This can be done by:
- Adding `-whitelistaddress=<address>` to your daemon launch strings, or
- Adding `whitelistaddress=<address>` to your daemon `conf` files

---
## Create `start` Script

We need a `start` script in the home dir to start Komodo, Smart Chains and all 3rd party coin daemons with the `-pubkey` option. `-pubkey` is not required for LTC daemon, but other coins **must** be launched with it to be able to notarise.

- You can also use the `setpubkey` command to set the pubkey for a running daemon. For example:
    ```bash
    komodo-cli setpubkey <pubkey>
    ```

- Alternatively, you can set the pubkey in your `conf` file to make sure it is set every time you launch a daemon. For example:
    ```bash
    echo "pubkey=<pubkey>" >> ~/.komodo/komodo.conf
    ```

- Create and open a `start` file
    ```bash
    nano ~/start
    ```
- Add the following lines:
    ```bash
    #!/bin/bash

    # Get our pubkey
    source ~/komodo/src/pubkey.txt

    # Start LTC
    litecoind &
    sleep 60

    # Start KMD
    komodod -gen -genproclimit=1 -pubkey=$pubkey -minrelaytxfee=0.000035 -opretmintxfee=0.004 -notary=".litecoin/litecoin.conf" &
    sleep 600

    # Start all other Main Smart Chains
    cd ~/dPoW/iguana
    ./assetchains.old
    ```
- Make the `start` file executable:
    ```bash
    chmod +x start
    ```

Note the KMD launch string includes some extra parameters:
- `-gen` - enables mining
- `-genproclimit=1` - sets the number of threads to use for mining
- `-minrelaytxfee=0.000035` - sets the minimum relay fee for transactions
- `-opretmintxfee=0.004` - sets the minimum fee for OP_RETURN transactions
- `-notary=".litecoin/litecoin.conf"` - sets the location of the notary node's `litecoin.conf` file. **This is required to be able to notarise KMD -> LTC.**

### Execute the `start` script

This may take up to 20-30 minutes before all chains are responsive (depending on your system spec).

```bash
cd ~
./start
```

Don't forget to also restart the dockerised 3rd party daemons.
```bash
cd ~/nn_docker_3p
./start_3p.sh
```

---
## Start `Iguana` and begin notarising!
- **Notaries are responsible funding their Notary KMD addresses - funds for other chains will be provided from the Komodo team.**
- All notary addresses on all dPoW coins (except KMD) will be funded at the start of a season, and periodically topped up as the season progresses.
- Please contact `smk` on Discord if you need a top up.
- **Notary funds are for notarisation only, and should not leave your notary addresses for any other purpose.**
- At the end of the season, any remaining funds are to be returned to `smk` for redistribution to the notaries elected for the next season.

**Make sure all daemons have started properly and are responding to RPC commands before starting Iguana.**
- To start notarising the Main coins, run:
    ```bash
    cd ~/dPoW/iguana
    ./m_notary_main
    ```
- To start notarising the 3rd party coins, run:
    ```bash
    cd ~/dPoW/iguana
    ./m_notary_3rdparty_docker
    ```
This will take a few minutes to add peer notaries, and register the coin daemons with Iguana. You will see `INIT with 64 notaries` once the process finishes.

---
## Firewall and Ports

Enable `ufw` and close all routes except `ssh`. Create rules to allow the following:
- Each daemon's P2P port. You can find these in the daemon's `conf` file, or by looking at the response from `sudo netstat -plant`. For the 3P daemons, you can find the P2P port in the [`configure.sh`](https://github.com/smk762/notary_docker_3p/blob/main/mcl/configure.sh#L9) script in each coins subfolder (on the line that has `port=`).
- Iguana's Main P2P port (13348)
- Iguana's 3P P2P port (13345)
- AtomicDEX API P2P ports (38890 & 38900)

For example:
```bash
sudo ufw allow 7770 comment 'KMD Main P2P'
sudo ufw allow 8770 comment 'KMD 3P P2P'
sudo ufw allow 9333 comment 'LTC P2P'
...
sudo ufw allow 13348 comment 'Iguana Main P2P'
sudo ufw allow 13345 comment 'Iguana 3P P2P'
sudo ufw allow 38890 comment 'AtomicDEX P2P'
sudo ufw allow 38900 comment 'AtomicDEX P2P'
```
**Make sure you dont expose any RPC ports! This may give the whole internet access to your deamons!**
 
---
## NN Scripts
There are many open sourced scripts for managing your Komodo Notary Node servers. If you're having trouble with something, you can have a look at [these tools](https://github.com/KomodoPlatform/komodotools), or ask the other NN's, who will show you the scripts they use to overcome issues. With that being said, if you find a way to make a job easier or find a way to better the ecosystem, please let the rest of the NN OPs know, we would love to hear it.

---
## Setup for Debian 11
Install the following dependancies:
```
sudo apt-get install -y tmux dc bc dnsutils speedtest-cli build-essential git libsodium-dev libssl-dev pkg-config autoconf automake bsdmainutils cmake curl g++-multilib htop libboost-all-dev libc6-dev libgtest-dev libtool m4 software-properties-common unzip wget zlib1g-dev binutils-dev clang jq libcurl4-openssl-dev libdb++-dev libevent-dev libexpat1-dev libgnutls28-dev libldns-dev liblzma-dev libnanomsg-dev libncurses-dev libprotobuf-dev libqrencode-dev libreadline-dev libunwind-dev ncurses-dev ntp ntpdate protobuf-compiler python3-pip
```

Use the template below to create build scripts for coins as needed:

```bash
# AnyCoin compile script (q) Decker, 2021-2022
make -C ${PWD}/depends v=1 NO_PROTON=1 NO_QT=1 HOST=$(depends/config.guess) -j$(nproc --all)

./autogen.sh

CXXFLAGS="-g0 -O2" \
CONFIG_SITE="$PWD/depends/$(depends/config.guess)/share/config.site" ./configure --disable-tests --disable-bench --without-miniupnpc --enable-experimental-asm --with-gui=no --disable-bip70

make V=1 -j$(nproc --all)
```
